But while we are confined to books, though the most select and classic,
and read only particular written languages, which are themselves but
dialects and provincial, we are in danger of forgetting the language
which all things and events speak without metaphor, which alone is
copious and standard. Much is published, but little printed. The rays
which stream through the shutter will be no longer remembered when the
shutter is wholly removed. No method nor discipline can supersede the
necessity of being forever on the alert. What is a course of history,
or philosophy, or poetry, no matter how well selected, or the best
society, or the most admirable routine of life, compared with the
discipline of looking always at what is to be seen? Will you be a
reader, a student merely, or a seer? Read your fate, see what is before
you, and walk on into futurity.

I did not read books the first summer; I hoed beans. Nay, I often did
better than this. There were times when I could not afford to sacrifice
the bloom of the present moment to any work, whether of the head or
hands. I love a broad margin to my life. Sometimes, in a summer
morning, having taken my accustomed bath, I sat in my sunny doorway
from sunrise till noon, rapt in a revery, amidst the pines and
hickories and sumachs, in undisturbed solitude and stillness, while the
birds sing around or flitted noiseless through the house, until by the
sun falling in at my west window, or the noise of some traveller’s
wagon on the distant highway, I was reminded of the lapse of time. I
grew in those seasons like corn in the night, and they were far better
than any work of the hands would have been. They were not time
subtracted from my life, but so much over and above my usual allowance.
I realized what the Orientals mean by contemplation and the forsaking
of works. For the most part, I minded not how the hours went. The day
advanced as if to light some work of mine; it was morning, and lo, now
it is evening, and nothing memorable is accomplished. Instead of
singing like the birds, I silently smiled at my incessant good fortune.
As the sparrow had its trill, sitting on the hickory before my door, so
had I my chuckle or suppressed warble which he might hear out of my
nest. My days were not days of the week, bearing the stamp of any
heathen deity, nor were they minced into hours and fretted by the
ticking of a clock; for I lived like the Puri Indians, of whom it is
said that “for yesterday, to-day, and to-morrow they have only one
word, and they express the variety of meaning by pointing backward for
yesterday, forward for to-morrow, and overhead for the passing day.”
This was sheer idleness to my fellow-townsmen, no doubt; but if the
birds and flowers had tried me by their standard, I should not have
been found wanting. A man must find his occasions in himself, it is
true. The natural day is very calm, and will hardly reprove his
indolence.

I had this advantage, at least, in my mode of life, over those who were
obliged to look abroad for amusement, to society and the theatre, that
my life itself was become my amusement and never ceased to be novel. It
was a drama of many scenes and without an end. If we were always indeed
getting our living, and regulating our lives according to the last and
best mode we had learned, we should never be troubled with ennui.
Follow your genius closely enough, and it will not fail to show you a
fresh prospect every hour. Housework was a pleasant pastime. When my
floor was dirty, I rose early, and, setting all my furniture out of
doors on the grass, bed and bedstead making but one budget, dashed
water on the floor, and sprinkled white sand from the pond on it, and
then with a broom scrubbed it clean and white; and by the time the
villagers had broken their fast the morning sun had dried my house
sufficiently to allow me to move in again, and my meditations were
almost uninterupted. It was pleasant to see my whole household effects
out on the grass, making a little pile like a gypsy’s pack, and my
three-legged table, from which I did not remove the books and pen and
ink, standing amid the pines and hickories. They seemed glad to get out
themselves, and as if unwilling to be brought in. I was sometimes
tempted to stretch an awning over them and take my seat there. It was
worth the while to see the sun shine on these things, and hear the free
wind blow on them; so much more interesting most familiar objects look
out of doors than in the house. A bird sits on the next bough,
life-everlasting grows under the table, and blackberry vines run round
its legs; pine cones, chestnut burs, and strawberry leaves are strewn
about. It looked as if this was the way these forms came to be
transferred to our furniture, to tables, chairs, and bedsteads,—because
they once stood in their midst.

My house was on the side of a hill, immediately on the edge of the
larger wood, in the midst of a young forest of pitch pines and
hickories, and half a dozen rods from the pond, to which a narrow
footpath led down the hill. In my front yard grew the strawberry,
blackberry, and life-everlasting, johnswort and goldenrod, shrub-oaks
and sand-cherry, blueberry and groundnut. Near the end of May, the
sand-cherry (_Cerasus pumila_,) adorned the sides of the path with its
delicate flowers arranged in umbels cylindrically about its short
stems, which last, in the fall, weighed down with good sized and
handsome cherries, fell over in wreaths like rays on every side. I
tasted them out of compliment to Nature, though they were scarcely
palatable. The sumach (_Rhus glabra_,) grew luxuriantly about the
house, pushing up through the embankment which I had made, and growing
five or six feet the first season. Its broad pinnate tropical leaf was
pleasant though strange to look on. The large buds, suddenly pushing
out late in the spring from dry sticks which had seemed to be dead,
developed themselves as by magic into graceful green and tender boughs,
an inch in diameter; and sometimes, as I sat at my window, so
heedlessly did they grow and tax their weak joints, I heard a fresh and
tender bough suddenly fall like a fan to the ground, when there was not
a breath of air stirring, broken off by its own weight. In August, the
large masses of berries, which, when in flower, had attracted many wild
bees, gradually assumed their bright velvety crimson hue, and by their
weight again bent down and broke the tender limbs.



As I sit at my window this summer afternoon, hawks are circling about
my clearing; the tantivy of wild pigeons, flying by twos and threes
athwart my view, or perching restless on the white-pine boughs behind
my house, gives a voice to the air; a fishhawk dimples the glassy
surface of the pond and brings up a fish; a mink steals out of the
marsh before my door and seizes a frog by the shore; the sedge is
bending under the weight of the reed-birds flitting hither and thither;
and for the last half hour I have heard the rattle of railroad cars,
now dying away and then reviving like the beat of a partridge,
conveying travellers from Boston to the country. For I did not live so
out of the world as that boy who, as I hear, was put out to a farmer in
the east part of the town, but ere long ran away and came home again,
quite down at the heel and homesick. He had never seen such a dull and
out-of-the-way place; the folks were all gone off; why, you couldn’t
even hear the whistle! I doubt if there is such a place in
Massachusetts now:—

     “In truth, our village has become a butt
     For one of those fleet railroad shafts, and o’er
     Our peaceful plain its soothing sound is—Concord.”

The Fitchburg Railroad touches the pond about a hundred rods south of
where I dwell. I usually go to the village along its causeway, and am,
as it were, related to society by this link. The men on the freight
trains, who go over the whole length of the road, bow to me as to an
old acquaintance, they pass me so often, and apparently they take me
for an employee; and so I am. I too would fain be a track-repairer
somewhere in the orbit of the earth.

The whistle of the locomotive penetrates my woods summer and winter,
sounding like the scream of a hawk sailing over some farmer’s yard,
informing me that many restless city merchants are arriving within the
circle of the town, or adventurous country traders from the other side.
As they come under one horizon, they shout their warning to get off the
track to the other, heard sometimes through the circles of two towns.
Here come your groceries, country; your rations, countrymen! Nor is
there any man so independent on his farm that he can say them nay. And
here’s your pay for them! screams the countryman’s whistle; timber like
long battering rams going twenty miles an hour against the city’s
walls, and chairs enough to seat all the weary and heavy laden that
dwell within them. With such huge and lumbering civility the country
hands a chair to the city. All the Indian huckleberry hills are
stripped, all the cranberry meadows are raked into the city. Up comes
the cotton, down goes the woven cloth; up comes the silk, down goes the
woollen; up come the books, but down goes the wit that writes them.

When I meet the engine with its train of cars moving off with planetary
motion,—or, rather, like a comet, for the beholder knows not if with
that velocity and with that direction it will ever revisit this system,
since its orbit does not look like a returning curve,—with its steam
cloud like a banner streaming behind in golden and silver wreaths, like
many a downy cloud which I have seen, high in the heavens, unfolding
its masses to the light,—as if this travelling demigod, this
cloud-compeller, would ere long take the sunset sky for the livery of
his train; when I hear the iron horse make the hills echo with his
snort like thunder, shaking the earth with his feet, and breathing fire
and smoke from his nostrils, (what kind of winged horse or fiery dragon
they will put into the new Mythology I don’t know), it seems as if the
earth had got a race now worthy to inhabit it. If all were as it seems,
and men made the elements their servants for noble ends! If the cloud
that hangs over the engine were the perspiration of heroic deeds, or as
beneficent as that which floats over the farmer’s fields, then the
elements and Nature herself would cheerfully accompany men on their
errands and be their escort.

I watch the passage of the morning cars with the same feeling that I do
the rising of the sun, which is hardly more regular. Their train of
clouds stretching far behind and rising higher and higher, going to
heaven while the cars are going to Boston, conceals the sun for a
minute and casts my distant field into the shade, a celestial train
beside which the petty train of cars which hugs the earth is but the
barb of the spear. The stabler of the iron horse was up early this
winter morning by the light of the stars amid the mountains, to fodder
and harness his steed. Fire, too, was awakened thus early to put the
vital heat in him and get him off. If the enterprise were as innocent
as it is early! If the snow lies deep, they strap on his snow-shoes,
and with the giant plow, plow a furrow from the mountains to the
seaboard, in which the cars, like a following drill-barrow, sprinkle
all the restless men and floating merchandise in the country for seed.
All day the fire-steed flies over the country, stopping only that his
master may rest, and I am awakened by his tramp and defiant snort at
midnight, when in some remote glen in the woods he fronts the elements
incased in ice and snow; and he will reach his stall only with the
morning star, to start once more on his travels without rest or
slumber. Or perchance, at evening, I hear him in his stable blowing off
the superfluous energy of the day, that he may calm his nerves and cool
his liver and brain for a few hours of iron slumber. If the enterprise
were as heroic and commanding as it is protracted and unwearied!

Far through unfrequented woods on the confines of towns, where once
only the hunter penetrated by day, in the darkest night dart these
bright saloons without the knowledge of their inhabitants; this moment
stopping at some brilliant station-house in town or city, where a
social crowd is gathered, the next in the Dismal Swamp, scaring the owl
and fox. The startings and arrivals of the cars are now the epochs in
the village day. They go and come with such regularity and precision,
and their whistle can be heard so far, that the farmers set their
clocks by them, and thus one well conducted institution regulates a
whole country. Have not men improved somewhat in punctuality since the
railroad was invented? Do they not talk and think faster in the depot
than they did in the stage-office? There is something electrifying in
the atmosphere of the former place. I have been astonished at the
miracles it has wrought; that some of my neighbors, who, I should have
prophesied, once for all, would never get to Boston by so prompt a
conveyance, are on hand when the bell rings. To do things “railroad
fashion” is now the by-word; and it is worth the while to be warned so
often and so sincerely by any power to get off its track. There is no
stopping to read the riot act, no firing over the heads of the mob, in
this case. We have constructed a fate, an _Atropos_, that never turns
aside. (Let that be the name of your engine.) Men are advertised that
at a certain hour and minute these bolts will be shot toward particular
points of the compass; yet it interferes with no man’s business, and
the children go to school on the other track. We live the steadier for
it. We are all educated thus to be sons of Tell. The air is full of
invisible bolts. Every path but your own is the path of fate. Keep on
your own track, then.

What recommends commerce to me is its enterprise and bravery. It does
not clasp its hands and pray to Jupiter. I see these men every day go
about their business with more or less courage and content, doing more
even than they suspect, and perchance better employed than they could
have consciously devised. I am less affected by their heroism who stood
up for half an hour in the front line at Buena Vista, than by the
steady and cheerful valor of the men who inhabit the snow-plough for
their winter quarters; who have not merely the three-o’-clock in the
morning courage, which Bonaparte thought was the rarest, but whose
courage does not go to rest so early, who go to sleep only when the
storm sleeps or the sinews of their iron steed are frozen. On this
morning of the Great Snow, perchance, which is still raging and
chilling men’s blood, I hear the muffled tone of their engine bell from
out the fog bank of their chilled breath, which announces that the cars
_are coming_, without long delay, notwithstanding the veto of a New
England north-east snow storm, and I behold the ploughmen covered with
snow and rime, their heads peering, above the mould-board which is
turning down other than daisies and the nests of field-mice, like
bowlders of the Sierra Nevada, that occupy an outside place in the
universe.

Commerce is unexpectedly confident and serene, alert, adventurous, and
unwearied. It is very natural in its methods withal, far more so than
many fantastic enterprises and sentimental experiments, and hence its
singular success. I am refreshed and expanded when the freight train
rattles past me, and I smell the stores which go dispensing their odors
all the way from Long Wharf to Lake Champlain, reminding me of foreign
parts, of coral reefs, and Indian oceans, and tropical climes, and the
extent of the globe. I feel more like a citizen of the world at the
sight of the palm-leaf which will cover so many flaxen New England
heads the next summer, the Manilla hemp and cocoa-nut husks, the old
junk, gunny bags, scrap iron, and rusty nails. This car-load of torn
sails is more legible and interesting now than if they should be
wrought into paper and printed books. Who can write so graphically the
history of the storms they have weathered as these rents have done?
They are proof-sheets which need no correction. Here goes lumber from
the Maine woods, which did not go out to sea in the last freshet, risen
four dollars on the thousand because of what did go out or was split
up; pine, spruce, cedar,—first, second, third, and fourth qualities, so
lately all of one quality, to wave over the bear, and moose, and
caribou. Next rolls Thomaston lime, a prime lot, which will get far
among the hills before it gets slacked. These rags in bales, of all
hues and qualities, the lowest condition to which cotton and linen
descend, the final result of dress,—of patterns which are now no longer
cried up, unless it be in Milwaukie, as those splendid articles,
English, French, or American prints, ginghams, muslins, &c., gathered
from all quarters both of fashion and poverty, going to become paper of
one color or a few shades only, on which forsooth will be written tales
of real life, high and low, and founded on fact! This closed car smells
of salt fish, the strong New England and commercial scent, reminding me
of the Grand Banks and the fisheries. Who has not seen a salt fish,
thoroughly cured for this world, so that nothing can spoil it, and
putting the perseverance of the saints to the blush? with which you may
sweep or pave the streets, and split your kindlings, and the teamster
shelter himself and his lading against sun wind and rain behind it,—and
the trader, as a Concord trader once did, hang it up by his door for a
sign when he commences business, until at last his oldest customer
cannot tell surely whether it be animal, vegetable, or mineral, and yet
it shall be as pure as a snowflake, and if it be put into a pot and
boiled, will come out an excellent dun fish for a Saturday’s dinner.
Next Spanish hides, with the tails still preserving their twist and the
angle of elevation they had when the oxen that wore them were careering
over the pampas of the Spanish main,—a type of all obstinacy, and
evincing how almost hopeless and incurable are all constitutional
vices. I confess, that practically speaking, when I have learned a
man’s real disposition, I have no hopes of changing it for the better
or worse in this state of existence. As the Orientals say, “A cur’s
tail may be warmed, and pressed, and bound round with ligatures, and
after a twelve years’ labor bestowed upon it, still it will retain its
natural form.” The only effectual cure for such inveteracies as these
tails exhibit is to make glue of them, which I believe is what is
usually done with them, and then they will stay put and stick. Here is
a hogshead of molasses or of brandy directed to John Smith,
Cuttingsville, Vermont, some trader among the Green Mountains, who
imports for the farmers near his clearing, and now perchance stands
over his bulk-head and thinks of the last arrivals on the coast, how
they may affect the price for him, telling his customers this moment,
as he has told them twenty times before this morning, that he expects
some by the next train of prime quality. It is advertised in the
Cuttingsville Times.

While these things go up other things come down. Warned by the whizzing
sound, I look up from my book and see some tall pine, hewn on far
northern hills, which has winged its way over the Green Mountains and
the Connecticut, shot like an arrow through the township within ten
minutes, and scarce another eye beholds it; going

     “to be the mast
     Of some great ammiral.”

And hark! here comes the cattle-train bearing the cattle of a thousand
hills, sheepcots, stables, and cow-yards in the air, drovers with their
sticks, and shepherd boys in the midst of their flocks, all but the
mountain pastures, whirled along like leaves blown from the mountains
by the September gales. The air is filled with the bleating of calves
and sheep, and the hustling of oxen, as if a pastoral valley were going
by. When the old bell-wether at the head rattles his bell, the
mountains do indeed skip like rams and the little hills like lambs. A
car-load of drovers, too, in the midst, on a level with their droves
now, their vocation gone, but still clinging to their useless sticks as
their badge of office. But their dogs, where are they? It is a stampede
to them; they are quite thrown out; they have lost the scent. Methinks
I hear them barking behind the Peterboro’ Hills, or panting up the
western slope of the Green Mountains. They will not be in at the death.
Their vocation, too, is gone. Their fidelity and sagacity are below par
now. They will slink back to their kennels in disgrace, or perchance
run wild and strike a league with the wolf and the fox. So is your
pastoral life whirled past and away.